# copper-dragon
UCSC Genome Browser Hacks

The [UCSC Genome Browser](https://genome.ucsc.edu) is 
a widely used visualization tool for genomic data. 
Genomic functional features can be presented in many ways.

### Get wget

```
{bash}
ruby -e "$(curl -fsSL \
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/master/install)"

brew install wget --with-libressl

wget ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/samples/[someChIP-Seq]_H3K36me2_rep1.wig.gz
```

## THE PLAN

* Convert wig to bigwig if needed with wigToBigWig
* Convert the bigwig to bed using bigwigToBedGraph
* Lift over the bed
* Convert the bed back to wig using bedGraphToBigWig

## Pipeline

```
{bash}
## TOOLCHAIN PERMISSIONS
chmod 755 wigToBigWig
chmod 755 bigWigToBedGraph
chmod 755 liftOver
# sort
# remove overlap
chmod 755 bedGraphToBigWig

## CONVERT WIG FILES TO BIGWIG FILES
./wigToBigWig [someChIP-Seq]_H3K36me2_rep1.wig \
http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg18/bigZips/hg18.chrom.sizes \
[someChIP-Seq]_H3K36me2_rep1.wig.bw -clip

## CONVERT BIGWIG FILES TO BEDGRAPH FILES
## liftOver only works on bed formatted files
./bigWigToBedGraph [someChIP-Seq]_H3K36me2_rep1.wig.bw \
[someChIP-Seq]_H3K36me2_rep1.wig.bw.bedGraph

## LIFTOVER FROM HG18 TO HG38
./liftOver [someChIP-Seq]_H3K36me2_rep1.wig.bw.bedGraph \
hg18ToHg38.over.chain [someChIP-Seq]_H3K36me2_rep1.wig.bw.bedGraph.hg38 \
[someChIP-Seq]_H3K36me2_rep1.wig.bw.bedGraph.unMapped

## SORT BEDGRAPH FILES
sort -k1,1 -k2,2n [someChIP-Seq]_H3K36me2_rep1.wig.bw.bedGraph.hg38 > \
[someChIP-Seq]_H3K36me2_rep1.wig.bw.bedGraph.hg38.sorted

## REMOVE OVERLAPPING ANNOTATIONS FROM BED FILES
./bedRemoveOverlap [someChIP-Seq]_H3K36me2_rep1.wig.bw.bedGraph.hg38.sorted \
[someChIP-Seq]_H3K36me2_rep1.wig.bw.bedGraph.hg38.sorted.noOverlap

## CONVERT BEDGRAPH FILES BACK TO BIGWIG FILES
./bedGraphToBigWig [someChIP-Seq]_H3K36me2_rep1.wig.bw.bedGraph.hg38.sorted.noOverlap \
http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg38/bigZips/hg38.chrom.sizes \
[someChIP-Seq]_H3K36me2_rep1.wig.bw.bedGraph.hg38.sorted.noOverlap.bw
```


### bigWigs

[UCSC bigWig Help](http://genome.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/help/bigWig.html) 
describes the process of generating and handling bigWig files. 
Scripts to run these processes are available at 
[binary utilities directory](http://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/admin/exe/). 
From this directory, we find liftOver, wigToBigWig, 
bigWigToBedGraph, bedGraphToBigWig.

### liftOver

LiftOver is a tool to convert genome coordinates 
and genome annotation files between assemblies.
Using the [UCSC Tools](http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/admin/exe/macOSX.x86_64/). 
Data are desired in hg38 format.

### Chain Files

```
{bash}
wget --timestamping \
'ftp://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg19/liftOver/hg19ToHg38.over.chain.gz' \
-O hg19ToHg38.over.chain.gz

wget --timestamping \
'ftp://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg18/liftOver/hg18ToHg38.over.chain.gz' \
-O hg18ToHg38.over.chain.gz

wget --timestamping \
'ftp://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg38/liftOver/hg38ToHg19.over.chain.gz' \
-O hg38ToHg19.over.chain.gz

gunzip *gz
```

## Toolchain

### wigToBigWig v 4
Convert ascii format wig file (in fixedStep, 
variableStep or bedGraph format) to binary big wig format.

usage:

   wigToBigWig in.wig chrom.sizes out.bw

Where in.wig is in one of the ascii wiggle formats, but not including track lines
and chrom.sizes is a two-column file/URL: <chromosome name> <size in bases>
and out.bw is the output indexed big wig file.

If the assembly <db> is hosted by UCSC, chrom.sizes can be a URL like
  http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/<db>/bigZips/<db>.chrom.sizes
or you may use the script fetchChromSizes to download the chrom.sizes file.
If not hosted by UCSC, a chrom.sizes file can be generated by running
twoBitInfo on the assembly .2bit file.

options:

* blockSize=N - Number of items to bundle in r-tree.  Default 256
* itemsPerSlot=N - Number of data points bundled at lowest level. Default 1024
* clip - If set just issue warning messages rather than dying if wig
                  file contains items off end of chromosome.
* unc - If set, do not use compression.
* fixedSummaries - If set, use a predefined sequence of summary levels.
* keepAllChromosomes - If set, store all chromosomes in b-tree.

### bigWigToBedGraph 
Convert from bigWig to bedGraph format.

usage:

   bigWigToBedGraph in.bigWig out.bedGraph

options:

* chrom=chr1 - if set restrict output to given chromosome
* start=N - if set, restrict output to only that over start
* end=N - if set, restict output to only that under end
* udcDir=/dir/to/cache - place to put cache for remote bigBed/bigWigs

### liftOver 
Move annotations from one assembly to another

usage:

   liftOver oldFile map.chain newFile unMapped

oldFile and newFile are in bed format by default, but can be in GFF and
maybe eventually others with the appropriate flags below.

The map.chain file has the old genome as the target and the new genome
as the query.

***********************************************************************
WARNING: liftOver was only designed to work between different
         assemblies of the same organism. It may not do what you want
         if you are lifting between different organisms. If there has
         been a rearrangement in one of the species, the size of the
         region being mapped may change dramatically after mapping.
***********************************************************************

options:

* minMatch=0.N Minimum ratio of bases that must remap. Default 0.95
* gff  File is in gff/gtf format.  Note that the gff lines are converted
         separately.  It would be good to have a separate check after this
         that the lines that make up a gene model still make a plausible gene
         after liftOver
* genePred - File is in genePred format
* sample - File is in sample format
* bedPlus=N - File is bed N+ format
* positions - File is in browser "position" format
* hasBin - File has bin value (used only with -bedPlus)
* tab - Separate by tabs rather than space (used only with -bedPlus)
* pslT - File is in psl format, map target side only
* ends=N - Lift the first and last N bases of each record and combine the
             result. This is useful for lifting large regions like BAC end pairs.
* minBlocks=0.N Minimum ratio of alignment blocks or exons that must map
                  (default 1.00)
* fudgeThick    (bed 12 or 12+ only) If thickStart/thickEnd is not mapped,
                  use the closest mapped base.  Recommended if using 
               * minBlocks.
* multiple               Allow multiple output regions
* minChainT, -minChainQ  Minimum chain size in target/query, when mapping
                           to multiple output regions (default 0, 0)
* minSizeT               deprecated synonym for -minChainT (ENCODE compat.)
* minSizeQ               Min matching region size in query with -multiple.
* chainTable             Used with -multiple, format is db.tablename,
                               to extend chains from net (preserves dups)
* errorHelp              Explain error messages

### bedRemoveOverlap 
Remove overlapping records from a (sorted) bed file.  

Gets rid of the smaller of overlapping records.

usage:

   bedRemoveOverlap in.bed out.bed

options:

   -xxx=XXX

### bedGraphToBigWig v 4 
Convert a bedGraph file to bigWig format.

usage:

   bedGraphToBigWig in.bedGraph chrom.sizes out.bw

where in.bedGraph is a four column file in the format:

      <chrom> <start> <end> <value>

and chrom.sizes is a two-column file/URL: <chromosome name> <size in bases>
and out.bw is the output indexed big wig file.

If the assembly <db> is hosted by UCSC, chrom.sizes can be a URL like
  http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/<db>/bigZips/<db>.chrom.sizes
or you may use the script fetchChromSizes to download the chrom.sizes file.
If not hosted by UCSC, a chrom.sizes file can be generated by running
twoBitInfo on the assembly .2bit file.

The input bedGraph file must be sorted, use the unix sort command:

  sort -k1,1 -k2,2n unsorted.bedGraph > sorted.bedGraph

options:

* blockSize=N - Number of items to bundle in r-tree.  Default 256
* itemsPerSlot=N - Number of data points bundled at lowest level. Default 1024
* unc - If set, do not use compression.


### Fun Aside
Install [Virtual Box](https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads) 
to support [GBiB](https://genome.ucsc.edu/goldenpath/help/gbib.html#GetStarted).

## References

### [bigWig and bigBed, Jim Kent 2010](http://svn.donarmstrong.com/don/trunk/projects/research/papers_to_read/bioinformatics/sequence_alignment/bigwig_and_bigbed_enabling_browsing_of_large_distributed_datasets_kent_karolchik_bioinformatics_26_17_2204_2010_pmid_20639541.pdf)
